Blog post: "Fix an overloaded server" (#2479)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/overloaded-server/index.md

---
title: Fix an overloaded server
subhead: |
  How to determine a server's bottleneck, quickly fix the bottleneck, improve server performance, and prevent regressions.
authors:
  - khempenius
date: 2020-03-31

description: |
  How to determine a server's bottleneck, quickly fix the bottleneck, improve server performance, and prevent regressions.
tags:
  - post # post is a required tag for the article to show up in the blog.
---

# Overview

This guide shows you how to fix an overloaded server in 4 steps:

1.  [Assess](#Assess): Determine the server's bottleneck.
2.  [Stabilize](#Stabilize): Implement quick fixes to mitigate impact.
3.  [Improve](#Improve): Augment and optimize server capabilities.
4.  [Monitor](#Monitor): Use automated tools to help prevent future issues.

{% Aside %}

> If you have questions or feedback on this guide, or you want to share your own tips and tricks, please leave a comment in PR #TODO.

Author: ```suggestion
If you have questions or feedback on this guide, or you want to share your own tips and tricks, please leave a comment in PR #2479.
```

## Stabilize

An overloaded server can quickly lead to [cascading failures](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cascading_failure) elsewhere in the system. Thus, it's important to stabilize the server before attempting to make more significant changes.

### Rate Limiting

Rate limiting protects infrastructure by limiting the number of incoming requests. This is increasingly important as server performance degrades: as response times increase, users tend to aggressively refresh the page - increasing the server load even further.

#### Fix

Although rejecting a request is relatively inexpensive, the best way to protect your server is to handle rate limiting somewhere upstream from it - for instance, via a load balancer, reverse proxy, or CDN.

Instructions:
*   [NGINX](https://www.nginx.com/blog/rate-limiting-nginx/)
*   [HAProxy](https://www.haproxy.com/blog/four-examples-of-haproxy-rate-limiting/)
*   [Microsoft IIS](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/iis/configuration/system.applicationhost/sites/site/limits)

Further reading:
*   [Rate-limiting Strategies & Techniques](https://cloud.google.com/solutions/rate-limiting-strategies-techniques)

### HTTP Caching

> Look for ways to more aggressively cache content. If a resource can be served from a HTTP cache (whether it's the browser cache or a CDN), then it doesn't need to be requested from the origin server, which reduces server load.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Look for ways to more aggressively cache content. If a resource can be served from an HTTP cache (whether it's the browser cache or a CDN), then it doesn't need to be requested from the origin server, which reduces server load.
```

Although [service workers](https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/primers/service-workers) can also be used for caching, they utilize a separate [cache](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Cache) and are a supplement, rather than a replacement, for proper HTTP caching. For this reason, when handling an overloaded server, efforts should be focused on optimizing HTTP caching.

#### Diagnose

Run [Lighthouse](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/lighthouse) and look at the [Serve static assets with an efficient cache policy](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/lighthouse/audits/cache-policy) audit to view a list of resources with a short to medium [time to live](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_to_live) (TTL). For each listed resource, consider if the TTL should be increased. As a rough guideline:
*   Static resources should be cached with a long TTL (1 year).
*   Dynamic resources should be cached with a short TTL (3 hours).

#### Fix

> Set the [Cache-Control header](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Cache-Control) `max-age` directive to the appropriate number of seconds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set the [`Cache-Control`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Cache-Control) header's `max-age` directive to the appropriate number of seconds.
```

### Graceful Degradation

Graceful degradation is the strategy of temporarily reducing functionality in order to shed excess load from a system. This concept can be applied in many different ways: for example, serving a static text page instead of a full-featured application, disabling search or returning fewer search results, or disabling certain expensive or non-essential features. Emphasis should be placed on removing functionalities that can be safely and easily removed with minimal business impact.

## Improve

### Use a content delivery network (CDN)

Serving static assets can be offloaded from your server to a content delivery network (CDN), thereby reducing the load.

The primary function of a CDN is to deliver content to users quickly by providing a large network of servers that are located close to users. However, most CDNs also offer additional performance-related features like compression, load balancing, and media optimization.

> #### Setup a CDN

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Set up a CDN
```

CDNs benefit from scale, so operating your own CDN rarely makes sense. A basic CDN configuration is fairly quick to set up (~30 minutes) and consists of updating DNS records to point at the CDN.

> #### Optimize CDN Usage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Optimize CDN Usage
```

#### Diagnose

> Identify resources that are not being served from a CDN (but should be) by running [WebPageTest](https://webpagetest.org/). On the results page, click on the square above 'Effective use of CDN' to see the list of resources that should be served from a CDN.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Identify resources that are not being served from a CDN (but should be) by running [WebPageTest](https://webpagetest.org/). On the results page, click the square above **Effective use of CDN** to see the list of resources that should be served from a CDN.
```

In addition to load balancing, most cloud providers offer autoscaling ([GCP](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/load-balancing-and-autoscaling), [AWS](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/ec2/index.html), [Azure](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-monitor/platform/autoscale-overview)). Autoscaling works in conjunction with load balancing - autoscaling automatically scales compute resources up and down given demand at a given time. That being said, autoscaling is not magical - it takes time for new instances to come online and it requires significant configuration. Because of the additional complexity that autoscaling entails, a simpler load balancer-based setup should be considered first.

### Enable compression

> Text-based resources should be compressed using gzip or brotli. Gzip can reduce the transfer size of these resources by ~70%.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Text-based resources should be compressed using [`gzip`](https://www.gzip.org/) or [`brotli`](https://github.com/google/brotli). `gzip` can reduce the transfer size of these resources by ~70%.
```

*   [Apache](https://httpd.apache.org/docs/trunk/mod/mod_deflate.html)
*   [Microsoft](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/iis/extensions/iis-compression/iis-compression-overview)

### Optimize images and media

[Images make up the majority of the file size of most websites](https://images.guide/#introduction); optimizing images can quickly and significantly reduce the size of a site.

#### Diagnose

Lighthouse has a variety of audits that flag potential image optimizations. Alternatively, another strategy is to use DevTools to identify the largest image files - these images will likely be good candidates for optimization.

Relevant Lighthouse audits:
*   [Properly size images](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/lighthouse/audits/oversized-images)
*   [Defer offscreen images](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/lighthouse/audits/offscreen-images)
*   [Efficiently encode images](https://web.dev/uses-optimized-images/)
*   [Serve images in next-gen formats](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/lighthouse/audits/webp)
*   [Use video formats for animated content](https://web.dev/efficient-animated-content/)

> DevTools workflow:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chrome DevTools workflow:
```

- [Log network activity](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/chrome-devtools/network#load)

> - Click 'Img' to [filter out non-image resources](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/chrome-devtools/network/reference#filter-by-type)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Click 'Img' to [filter out non-image resources](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/chrome-devtools/network/reference#filter-by-type)
```
```suggestion
- Click **Img** to [filter out non-image resources](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/chrome-devtools/network/reference#filter-by-type)
```

> - Click the 'Size' column to sort the image files by size

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Click the **Size** column to sort the image files by size
```

#### Fix

*If you have limited time…*

Focus your time on Identifying large and frequently loaded images and manually optimizing them with a tool like [Squoosh](https://squoosh.app/). Hero images are often good candidates for optimization.

Things to keep in mind:
*   Size: Images should be no larger than necessary.
*   Compression: Generally speaking, a quality level of 80-85 will have a minimal effect on image quality while yielding a 30-40% reduction in file size.
*   Format: Use JPEGs for photos rather than PNG; use MP4 for [animated content](https://web.dev/replace-gifs-with-videos/) rather than GIF.

*If you have more time…*

> Consider setting up an image CDN if images make up a non-negligible portion of your site. Image CDNs are designed for serving and optimizing images and they will offload image serving from the origin server. Setting up an image CDN is straightforward but requires updating existing image URLs to point at the image CDN.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider setting up an image CDN if images make up a substantial portion of your site. Image CDNs are designed for serving and optimizing images and they will offload image serving from the origin server. Setting up an image CDN is straightforward but requires updating existing image URLs to point at the image CDN.
```

*   [images.guide](https://images.guide/)

### Minify JS and CSS

Minification removes unnecessary characters from JavaScript and CSS.

#### Diagnose

Use the [Minify CSS](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/lighthouse/audits/minify-css) and [Minify JavaScript](https://web.dev/unminified-javascript/) Lighthouse audits to identify resources that are in need of minification.

#### Fix

If you have limited time, focus on minifying your JavaScript. Most sites have more JavaScript than CSS, so this will be more impactful.
*   [Minify JavaScript](https://web.dev/reduce-network-payloads-using-text-compression/)
*   [Minify CSS](https://web.dev/minify-css/)

## Monitor

Server monitoring tools provide data collection, dashboards, and alerting regarding server performance. Their usage can help prevent and mitigate future server performance issues.

A monitoring setup should be kept as simple as possible. Excessive data collection and alerting has its costs: the greater the scope or frequency of data collection, the more expensive it is to collect and store; excessive alerting inevitably leads to ignored pages.

> Alerting should use metrics that consistently and accurately detect issues. Server response time (latency) is a metric that works particularly well for this: it catches a wide variety of issues and correlates directly with user experience. Alerting based on lower-level metrics like CPU usage can be a useful supplement but will catch a smaller subset of issues. In addition, alerting should be based on the performance observed at the tail (i.e. 95th or 99th percentiles), rather than averages. Otherwise, averages can easily obscure issues that don't affect all users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alerting should use metrics that consistently and accurately detect issues. Server response time (latency) is a metric that works particularly well for this: it catches a wide variety of issues and correlates directly with user experience. Alerting based on lower-level metrics like CPU usage can be a useful supplement but will catch a smaller subset of issues. In addition, alerting should be based on the performance observed at the tail (in the other words the 95th or 99th percentiles), rather than averages. Otherwise, averages can easily obscure issues that don't affect all users.
```
